Off the Couch with Ethan is an Australian travel television program, produced and presented by Ethan White. The program aims to inspire teenagers and their families to get "off the couch" and travel with their families, to go camping and visit Australian landmarks, towns and points of interests. The program airs on C31 Melbourne & Geelong and Channel 44 Adelaide.


== Synopsis ==
The program is a camping-based travel show produced and presented by Ethan White, a student who is passionate about travelling and camping at locations across Australia. Episodes are directed at high-school-aged students and their families, as Ethan encourages them to get off their technology devices, get outdoors and go visit the locations and points of interests showcased in the program.


== History ==
Ethan White was born in Adelaide, South Australia and resides in the town of Gawler, 40 kilometres north of Adelaide.Ethan has been passionate about filmmaking for most of his life. He stated that ever since he was a little boy, he loved filming with his family's digital video camera. Then, around the age of 11 years, Ethan's parents brought a camper trailer and Ethan immediately enjoyed the weekends and school holidays his family spent camping at locations in South Australia.During this time, Ethan mixed his two passions of filmmaking and travelling together, creating short family holiday videos that he would show to members of his family. As Ethan moved into high school, he realised that teenagers his age did not get the same opportunities he was so lucky to have.In November 2017, at the age of 15, Ethan contacted Channel 44 Adelaide, the community television station that services the Greater Adelaide region. Ethan proposed an idea for a travel-themed television program that encourages the younger generation to get outdoors with their families.
After discussions with the station, Ethan secured a program slot and formulated the title "Off the Couch with Ethan." In April 2018, filming for the first episode took place in the Southern Flinders Ranges in South Australia. The episode was broadcast on Saturday 23 June 2018 on Channel 44 Adelaide at 5:30pm, with great success and fantastic feedback from the general public.More Off the Couch with Ethan episodes continue to be produced and the program continues to be broadcast on Channel 44 Adelaide, as well as C31 Melbourne & Geelong, which began broadcasting the program in early 2019.A second season of the program was announced in November 2021, and is due to commence broadcasting in February 2022.


== Episodes ==


=== Season 1 (2018–21) ===


== Awards ==
In January 2019, Ethan White was named a joint winner of the Town of Gawler Young Citizen of the Year for his outstanding efforts and contribution to the community, in encouraging the younger generation to explore the great Australian outdoors.In October 2019, Ethan & Off the Couch with Ethan were nominated for 5 categories at the 2019 Antenna Awards: Best Outdoor or Recreational Program, Best Youth Program, Youth Personality of the Year, Personality of the Year and Program of the Year.Ethan & the program were again nominated for 4 categories at the 2021 Antenna Awards, including: Best Outdoor or Recreational Program, Best Youth Program, Best Youth Personality and Personality of the Year. In September 2021, it was announced that Off the Couch with Ethan won the Antenna Award for Best Outdoor or Recreational Program.In January 2022, Ethan White was awarded the Town of Gawler Young Citizen of the Year for 2022, for his efforts in community contribution, including charity work, promotion of the community and assisting the youth of Gawler.


== References ==


== External links ==
Off the Couch with Ethan website
Antenna Awards
Community television in Australia